
In addition to my work in physics, I occasionally try to write code.

I've been programming since my Junior year of high school, where I had the privaledge of taking "Object Oriented Programming with Java" at the [Oklahoma School of Science and Mathematics (OSSM)](https://www.ossm.edu/). I went on to take two additional programming classes at OSSM, "Data Structures 1" and "Data Structures 2." Unfortunately, and a math and physics double major at OSU I did not manage to fit in any additional programming classes. However, from my freshman year I did work on undergraduate research in the lab of Prof. Flera Rizatdinova, where I used C/C++ and and the ROOT package to analyze particle physics data, first from the DZero experiment at Fermilab's Tevatron collider and later from the ATLAS experiment at CERN's Large Hadron Collier.  

When I got to UT, I intended to switch from particle experiment to particle theory, but I was still required to get a semesters worth of experimental research experience. UT had just hired ATLAS collaboration member Prof. Peter Onyisi the year prior, and so given my previous ATLAS experience, I asked him if I could complete my experimental requirement with him over the summer. Fortunately for me, he agreed on the condition that I go with to Geneva to work at CERN. Under Prof. Onyisi, I was tasked, along with another student, with first writing software in Python to retrieve configuration files from a database, and second with studying, using Monte Carlo simulated data, the optimal feature set for detecting the production of a Higgs boson along with a top quark anti-top quark pair. For the latter, we used the boosted decision tree from an internal CERN machine learning package, the Toolkit for Multivariate Analysis (TMVA).

Unfortunately, since my time in Geneva with Prof. Onyisi, I have not had occasion to do any coding for any of my work (Unless you count using Mathematica's built in functions). It is however something that I have largely enjoyed since I was first exposed to Java at OSSM. Occasionally, I write some code on my own to keep up my skills. These days I mostly write code in Python, and I must admit I've largely allowed my familiarity with Java and C/C++ to rust. In addition to python, I've become interested in functional programming, and have tried to learn Haskell. I've  also played around a bit with javascript.

Below are some samples of code I've written:
